Constrained Whole-Body T racking for Humanoid Robots
Daniel Morton1, Pranit Mohnot 1, Marco Pavone1,2
1Stanford University,2NVIDIA Research
Abstract:Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) have demonstrated
impressive whole-body agility for humanoid robots, yet ensuring safety and satisfying
constraints – particularly those specified after training – remains a challenge. T owards
this goal, we present ConstrainedMimic, a control framework that leverages whole-body
kinematics and dynamics for real-time constraint enforcement within RL tracking
policies. By integrating principles from operational space control and control barrier
functions (CBFs), we enable the satisfaction of arbitrary runtime constraints on
both the kinematic reference motion and the underlying dynamics. In whole-body
motion-tracking and teleoperation experiments on a (simulated) Unitree G1 with a
learned policy, we demonstrate collision avoidance (both with the robot body and
external obstacles), joint limits, and center of mass stability constraints. By remaining
consistent with the current contact mode and tracking objectives, we minimally
restrict the capabilities of the policy when constraints are active. Our method is fully
differentiable, runs on CPU, GPU, and TPU, and can be deployed at up to 300-500
Hz. All software will be freely available upon publication.
Keywords:Whole-body control, Safety, Humanoids
1 Introduction
Modern humanoid robots are becoming increasingly capable of whole-body teleoperation, locomotion, and
manipulation, with reinforcement learning (RL) policies that achieve striking agility on hardware [1, 2, 3].
As these systems are deployed, especially when they must interact with novel scenes, other equipment,
or humans, a framework to enforce previously unseen safety constraints becomes critical. An ideal
runtime safety framework would be minimally invasive, policy-agnostic, easily configurable for arbitrary
deployment-time constraints, and capable of real-time speeds (≥50Hz).
Recent work has led to significant advances in humanoid whole-body control, demonstrating capable
tracking across teleoperation [1, 4, 5, 6], multi-task control [2, 7], and expressive behaviors at scale [3].
Despite this diversity, these works share a common architectural paradigm: reference kinematic trajectories
from retargeted MoCap, VR teleoperation, or high-level planners are passed to an RL motion tracking
policy, which takes these (often dynamically infeasible) references and outputs joint commands that
produce closely-tracking dynamically-feasible trajectories on the real robot. This separation provides two
natural points at which safety can be considered without modifying the tracking policy: the input kinematic
reference, and the output dynamics.
With these desiderata and problem structure in mind,control barrier functions(CBFs) may be a
natural choice to embed safety into humanoid locomotion and manipulation. Commonly used in
optimization-based control, CBFs enforce safety via forward-invariance of a set defined by a differentiable
barrier functionh(z), and are typically applied as a safety filter on top of a nominal, unsafe controller [8].
While CBFs for humanoids have been explored in prior work [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], safety for whole-body
control remains underexplored, particularly in the context of learning-based motion tracking policies.
1.1 Related W ork
Whole-Body Control of Humanoid Robots.For years, the dominant approach to whole-body control
was purely model-based, including operational-space control [15, 16, 17] and broader optimization-based
Correspondence to: dmorton@stanford.edu
arXiv:2606.00374v1  [cs.RO]  29 May 2026