Egocentric Tactile and Proximity Sensors as Observation Priors for
Humanoid Collision Avoidance
Carson Kohlbrenner, Niraj Pudasaini, William Xie, Naren Sivagnanadasan,
Nikolaus Correll, and Alessandro Roncone
Abstract— Collision-free motion is often aided by tactile
and proximity sensors distributed on the body of the robot
due to their resistance to occlusion as opposed to external
cameras. However, how to shape the sensor’s properties, such as
sensing coverage; type; and range, to enable avoidant behavior
remains unclear. In this work, we present a reinforcement
learning framework for whole-body collision avoidance on a
humanoid H1-2 robot and use it to characterize how sensor
properties shape learned avoidance behavior. Using dodgeball
as a benchmark task, we ablate the properties of sensors
distributed across the upper body of the robot and find
that raw proximity measurements can substitute for explicit
object localization provided the sensing range is sufficient and
that sparse non-directional proximity signals outpace dense
directional alternatives in sample efficiency.
I. INTRODUCTION
Humanoid robots operating in dynamic environments near
humans, such as walking in crowded corridors or participat-
ing in sports, require preemptive avoidance for anticipated
collisions for safe deployment [1], [2]. Whole-body artificial
skins that sense contact, as well as actionable information
near the robot for anticipating contact, are commonly used
to aid in collision prevention as opposed to external cam-
eras due to their resistance to occlusion, low observation
complexity, and egocentric placement [3]. Classical control
paradigms use constraints for how the robot should react
to signals emanating from such artificial skin [4], [5], but
learned policies using reinforcement learning (RL) use the
sensor signals themselves to learn how to react [6].
Sensors used for collision anticipation include time-of-
flight (ToF) [7]–[9], capacitive [10], and acoustic sensors
[11] that each have distinct measurement principles that limit
their sensing coverage and signal quality. Although various
iterations of whole-body sensors for collision avoidance
have been proposed, the desirable qualities of a proximity
signal for collision avoidance remains unclear. For example,
capacitive sensing skins can detect objects radially less than
20 cmaway with signal degradation over distance [10],
whereas ToF sensors can detect objects meters away along
a directional measurement axis in a narrow field of view
(FoV) [7]. How to shape the signals of such egocentric
sensors to act as effective observation priors that couple the
robot’s body to its environment in a way that makes reactive
behaviors more learnable remains largely unexplored.
All authors are with the University of Colorado Boulder, 1111 Engineer-
ing Drive, Boulder, CO USA. This work is partially supported by NSF FW-
HTF-R grant #2222952.name.surname@colorado.edu.
Fig. 1: Distributed sensors reveal information about nearby
objects, with yellow lines indicating ray sensor detections
and blue lines indicating field sensor detections.
In this work, we simulate an H1-2 humanoid robot with
distributed egocentric tactile and proximity sensors on its
upper body with a variety of sensing coverage geometries
and signal qualities to identify what type of observation
representation is desirable for learned collision compliant
control. We isolate the observation priors imposed by the
sensors as a representation bias for learning by providing
no rewards on the sensor states. Our contributions are as
follows: 1) A reinforcement learning framework that utilizes
egocentric sensors to guide collision avoidant whole-body
control on a humanoid robot, and 2) a comparison of how
sensor signals impact learned collision avoidance behavior.
II. METHODS
To characterize the effects of egocentric distributed sen-
sors, we simulate an H1-2 humanoid robot with 64 sensors
distributed on the upper-half of the robot as seen in Fig. 2
playing an idealized form of dodgeball—a sport with the
objective to dodge incoming thrown balls.
A. Whole-Body Collision Avoidance
The policyπ θ(at|ot)outputs joint-level commands to
maximize the expected cumulative reward:
max
θ
E
" TX
t=0
γtrt(ot,at)
#
,(1)
whereγis the discount factor andr t encodes both stability
and safety. Training is conducted using the Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [12] algorithm, chosen for its robustness
and scalability to high-dimensional continuous control. The
arXiv:2604.25554v1  [cs.RO]  28 Apr 2026